The brain stem is often the first region of the brain affected by Alzheimer's Disease. The brain stem processes and sends out information that is essential for the human body to function. Functions such as the heart beating, regulated breathing, and digestion are all controlled by the brains stem so the possible decay that Alzheimer’s presents poses a severe risk to the life of those affected by the disease. The cell necrosis within the brainstem causes it to suffer irreparable damage and, in later stages of the disease, affect the automatic essential functions provided by the brain stem which can cause irregular breathing, trouble swallowing and digesting, and erratic heart rates.
The disruptions within brain function that Alzheimer’s pushes on its patients has a large effect on the cerebellum. As the central hub for balance, motor learning, and voluntary muscle action, damage to the cerebellum will impact the motor systems that the body uses for every day activity. The high concentration of neurons in the cerebellum makes it very susceptible to the constant cell death from Alzheimer’s disease. The ability to create smooth motions, thoughts, and emotions will be disrupted as it kills the neurons that regulate those functions. The damage between the cerebellum and cerebrum causes information discontinuity between the two sections of the brain which can lead to decisions being made that do not take the full picture into account.
The occipital lobe is essential for processing visual information. The damage present due to Alzheimer’s disease is likely to damage and disrupt the vision of those affected. Even if the eyes themselves are perfectly healthy the damage to the processing center is likely to cause serious effects on everyday lives. The spatial and depth perception present within the brain takes a large hit and causes processing errors such as viewing a shadow as a hole in the ground. This can significantly impact the decision making process of the individual affected due to the human reliance on sight as a means of perceiving the world around them. This can cause a loss in confidence that leaves those affected with a constant doubt in their mind when choosing to act on their sense of sight.
The effects of Alzheimer's on the parietal lobe are very similar to that of the occipital lobe but amplified due to the parietal’s coverage of other senses. The spatial processing functions that the parietal lobe provides is essential for proper functioning and interpretation of the world around the individual. The damage to the identification system can severely impact everyday function due to its reliance on recognising and analysing items, patterns, and others. The motor movements that the parietal lobe controls is also at heavy risk within those with Alzheimer's disease. This impairs the individual's ability to communicate and efficiently express themself. Along with this, the Parietal lobe is also in control of the sequencing and ordering methods within the brain. This can impact the decision making of the individual by causing illogical actions in an order which doesn't make sense. Examples of this include following the wrong steps of a recipe or dressing in an incorrect order.
As the hub for decision making within the brain, Alzheimer’s disease has a very noticeable and severe impact within this region of the brain. The brain's ability to plan, organise, and reason are all situated here and the tissue death from Alzheimer’s severely impacts these processes. The reduced ability to reason and plan leads to a dangerously high increase in impulsive acts which can cause severe consequences such as financial ruin. The damage to information processing can cause a reduction in adaptation and crush the brain's ability to cope with sudden changes. This can lead to a deficit when deciding and following through with long-term strategies and investments. When applied to the real world this can cause devastating consequences as long-term exchanges are something that the world has leaned on as a foundation of society (for example think about finances). When the basis for decision-making and judgement is impaired, the ripple effect through one's life that this causes cannot be understated as the reasoning and ideas behind one's decisions are shattered, causing gaps, flaws and detrimental consequences.
The ability to recall and apply past experiences to current scenarios is stored within the temporal lobe. The tissue necrosis from Alzheimer’s disease disrupts this process immensely. With this ability impaired, the learning and development of new skills within the brain is impaired due to the sudden lack of reference data. Trying something will always feel like it is the first time as the brain struggles to learn and apply teachings from past experiences. This specifically affects the decision making process by removing the ability to learn from past data. The risk-reward balance within the brain can take a heavy hit which causes continuous risk choices due to crippling the ability to learn from them. Along with the learning process, the temporal lobe is also in charge of recognising and understanding concepts and words along with regulating the balance between emotions and logic. The disruption of concepts leads to confusion all while emotions begin to have a much larger impact on the decisions of the individual affected which further impair the judgement of the patient.